---
apposition: solution
latitude: 
longitude: -1.28961
title: The DIY House
summary: ''
hero_image: "/content/assets/the-diy-house.png"
youtube_url: ''
region: ''
is_published: true

---
The DIY House follows a rapid retrofit approach of an existing building and includes its future residents in the design and construction process to create a safe and comfortable home. The DIY House is designed to be a high-quality bridging accommodation for people who are low-no needs and require a home where they can rebuild confidence and networks in order to regain autonomy of their lives. Integral to this being done well is the separation of housing costs from support costs.

Physically, it makes meanwhile use of city-centre locations which are in transition, usually empty with no immediate occupation planned. A pipeline of these spaces is maintained via carefully nurtured relationships with meanwhile space pioneer Makespace Oxford, as well as with Oxford Collages and other landlords in the city.

Thanks to strong partnerships with key organisations across the city, future residents can be identified early on in the design process allowing them to be a part of the enabling works required prior to moving in. They have access to the materials and inspiration they need to make the house a great home in relation to where it is in the city. Psychologically Informed Environment (PIE) design principles allow for every-day frustrations of living with others in close proximity to be minimised and even designed out where possible. The kitchen, bathrooms and utilities are ample and well-designed; bright, spacious and equipped for use. There are two comfortably sized living room spaces with a dining table for shared meals and a comfy sofa and chairs to catch the latest episode of that programme together. The living rooms are important spaces for residents to take ownership of, away from their private bedrooms.

While a home first and foremost, the new residents are not left without support. Floating support is provided during set-times but there is no space within the property that does not look homely. Individuals can have private chats with their support worker at the community coffee shop round the corner or receive general advice over a jigsaw puzzle in the living room. In the early days the support worker may facilitate weekly house meetings between the residents; increasing their capacity in managing the house on cooperative principles, with a ‘1 member, 1 vote’ style decision making process. These weekly meetings will cover items from the cleaning rota to having guests over, changes to utilities providers and what to spend the communal budget on that month. Each tenant pays into the monthly pot which is match funded by the project budget to spend on shared meals, a new board game or even an escape room! Some decisions are harder to make than others and facilitation of these meetings is possible in the longer-term if felt needed.

The building is only available to the project on a meanwhile lease at a minimum of 2 years. This is discussed opening with the tenants and built into the support and programme design. Thanks to saving money on empty property tax, the freeholder agrees to provide the building to the leaseholder on a peppercorn rent which is passed down to the tenants through reduced accommodation costs. Links to formal training to learn new or refresh old skills in the trades is built into the programme. In partnership with local organisations a regular How to Build House class is run, incorporating meanwhile development, community-led housing, renters cooperatives and practical renovation and construction skills in its teachings. Even if an individual secures employment and their housing allowance is adjusted, their rent remains truly affordable allowing them to save for a deposit on a private rental, a car or something else. This is a crucial difference to other forms of accommodation typically provided under a rapid housing approach with low barriers to entry, such as hostels, and is important if individuals are to truly take back autonomy of their lives.

The elements of the DIY House are understood from the beginning and built into the budget and programme. As a result, a rapid retrofit approach and an easy to use cost-calculator are developed and can be rolled out across other buildings, limiting cost and waste along the way as the project moves through the city, making best use of each site.